assigned a job. So he took care of us and showed us
around the city.
It's a typical Chinese city. It does have many more
tall buildings in it, like a typical forested
city. I think of it sort of like Hong Kong. It has a
huge building right at the confluence of the
Yangtze and some other river. I forget the name of
it. It runs into the Yangtze River right there.
Maybe Yellow River or something. Right at the
confluence. deep canyons into these riverbeds,
huge deep canyons. Oh, the rivers look like the
Mississippi River, don't they? And there's caves
in the hillside. It's very hilly on the mountains.
And not rock, yeah, but sort of like a limestone.
And there's just innumerable number of caves and
holes and revetments and bomb shelters all
throughout the city. And we're, you know, the
people who've been going for years because we
haven't even bombed it yet. They were used to it.
And sirens, the wailing sirens, you know, for bomb
alerts and all. The business was sort of as usual,
you know, in China. People were used to it. Again,
like ants for many of them, just millions of
people. And, of course, we'd drive in. There were
other American cars there. I don't remember
seeing any other Americans there. in the place,
except at the embassy I met General Burton, Army
Air Corps, Air Force officer at that time, major.
No, he was a general at that time. I had an interview
with him trying to get a regular commission in the
Air Force. I determined to get that regular
commission in the Air Force. What did he say? You
ever hear of General Bruce Holloway, who
commanded SAC before he retired? Bruce Holloway
is a very close friend of mine. He was
a major then, and he was with the American military
mission into China. That's the first time I met
him. We knew that pretty soon the AVD was going to be
dissolved, or the Air Force was going to take us
over. Many of us were talking about, well, we'd be
staying. China and go in the Air Force there, or did
we have a belly full of stuff and want to go home, or
what? And we were continuing talking about it, and
everybody had a different opinion. The only
thing, I want to do anything that would get me a
regular commission. That's what I want to do. So
you went in and talked to him? So I asked for a
conference with General Burton through Bruce
Holloway, and I went in, he gave me a conference, I
went in and sat down and talked to him. I guess I
explained the situation and talked to him about 30
minutes. Very attentive, just as nice as he could
be. When I got through, his only comment, he says,
well, and I think he called me just Mr. Bond. Yeah, I
wasn't. I was out of the military as Mr. Bond. I'm
sorry, I understand what you're saying, but only
Congress can do what you want to do. In other words,
you take a congressional act to give me a regular
commission. I said, well, if that's the way it is, I
think I'll just go on home. I was very disappointed
and a little bit mad. I could see my plan, I could see
my plan going to the dogs. Here I was, already
almost a double ace, combat experience, shot down
once, and still had scars on my face.
The Air Force building up now, and the experience
and all. So, old Bruce Holloway later on told me, I
met him years later, and he told me that when I left,
he said, General Byrne came out and he said, there
is a man that really wants a regular commission.
And get back to the city, that's, we had ice cream
there for the first time, had ice cream and
hamburgers, and that was out of this world, and
then Again, we stayed on alert there for a while,
but did nothing and pretty soon it got boring. I saw
the old man a lot up there because it was for
international planning and strategy and war
playing and all between the nations was going on.
Now they were free from Japanese bombing, so the
old man did most of his work there. It was soon after
that that we had to get into it again. The old man
laid a plan on it, of course, to go down to Kwai Lin
with another trick. Okay, now where's that? Kwai
Lin is here. Okay, that's... It's southeast of
Chongqing. K-W-E-I-L-I-N. Okay, that is... Down
toward Hong Kong. Toward Canton and Hong Kong. All
right. Okay, now what was... When was that and what
was the plan? So the idea of that was, as I told you,
the Japanese had reoriented their strategy to
take China from the coast and just hold what they
had in Burma. So they started to drive. They were
already in the northern part of China, and they
started to drive from the
That says Wuhan. It's a
toilet drive from the Wuhan, W-H-A-N area. It was
called another name then. Anyway.
And their drive was toward Chongqing? They were
going to drive straight down and take Wei Lin. Oh,
they were moving south. And split this part from
that part. Because the rail, the big rail head,
goes all the way down to Southeast Agency. Okay, so
they were going to take down. So that would split
off China. Hancao. Hancao was the name of that,
Wuhan. Okay, and so that would cut off... That
split China. Yeah, north and south. Okay. Okay.
And we were going to... The plan was to move most of
its forces... and I do mean most of them, to
Hualien. Now, this was a huge air base that the
Chinese had been building for some time, just like
the huge one-way, and I told you about it, Kunming,
in expectation of eventually having bombers
there. The old man planted that. It was an ideal,
beautiful layout for operations of aircraft,
except only the one-way approach to the field. The
other end was these huge mountains there. It
looked like ice cream cones turned upside down all
over it. It's a beautiful, luxurious valley. It's
where they usually take the VIP visitors to see
part of China. They take them down that river.
That's where Nixon was taken, by the way, when he
visited China. Beautiful area, and a very big
industrial city. And it's where a lot of the
refugees from Hong Kong came up into the Japanese
coast. Not Hong Kong, but Canton. They came back
and went in. and a key railroad center north and
south. That railroad center is the line of
communications that the Japanese were going to
come right straight on down through into Hanoi. I
mean, French Indochina, then split China north
and south and separate the east and west. And the
old man was, well, he needed air power to help, and
we were going to supposedly, you know, again, hold
off the Japanese Air Force, at least to keep them
from giving air support to their troops. and
bombing and strafing the Chinese troops. And
again, it was going to turn out to be an air battle
for the supremacy of the air before you could even
do that. So we laid the plan on to sneak our
aircraft, and I think there we took about 20
aircraft. No. I think it's 12 aircraft. 12
aircraft, 12 P-40. Again, Bob Neal and I would take
the South Coast down. Okay, when was it?
went to Quail Inn on the 11th of June.
And how many planes went down there? Did you tell
me? I think I told you it was twelve, and I believe
that's true.
The whole idea was
Well, on his first fight, on the 12th of June, we had
12 aircraft up in the air. The whole idea was to slip
in there late in the evening, and again, come in low
altitude late in the evening, and where the
Japanese and their spies wouldn't know about it,
and here again, be up in the air the next morning to
catch the Japanese bombers, the training crews
who were running daily training missions, in that
area, Hualien, Heng Yang, Ling Ling area, bombing
up and down a railroad track, you know, on training
missions out of Hanoi. They were training a
Japanese crew. And then we'd be ready to catch
them, you know, and they'd be completely
helpless, unsuspecting, surprising. That was
the plan. So we took 12 airplanes down that evening
and went to bed early and was ready the next morning
on alert.
It so happened that the Japanese learned our
stuff, and they knew that we were down there, and
they had their own plan that we later on found out
very rapidly. Anyway, we took off that morning
when, sure enough, here comes the flight, bombing
flight, bombers coming from Manoa. So we took off,
and I was leading the attack flight.
I was leading a flight, I had a flight of three,
no four, my staff was four, P-40Es at 15,000 feet,
the attack flight, and up behind me at 18,000 feet
was another four, and then at 20,000 feet was Bob
Neal in reserve with four aircraft, so we had 12
airplanes, and in my flight I had this the brand new
E's with 6.50 caliber guns firing out the wing
roots. What I mean today is just going to blast it
out of the air. It is fantastic. 6.50's hitting
something. So you were at 18,000 feet, right? And
where were the bombers? And sure enough, here come
the bombers in at about my level, 15,000 feet. But
then you see we had Bob and the others up at 18,000
feet, so we had some airplanes above us. But old
Charlie Bond was in the attack flight, and that
would be the same altitude. Well, I didn't see him
at first, but my wingman, Joe Rosberg, We had a
regular Air Force communication set. We could
talk to each other for a change. Clearly hear each
other. So he called me and told me, he said, right in
front of each other, right in front of you. And sure
enough, coming at an angle, we'd come about like
this. And an angle, matter of fact, we'd call him
just about like this. I forget what position it was
with respect to the field at that time, but at any
rate, I was closer here. So you were coming up from
the left? Right, from the left rear. And about the
same altitude, and I said, oh, I see him, I see him.
And here we were, four ships in attack formation,
so of course we told Bob Neal and all that. And
that's all the airplanes I could see. I think there
were four of them in formation. Four bombers.
Yeah, four bombers in a B formation.
Oh, five. Matter of fact, Joe Roberts flew up on my
wing and fired his gun to get my attention and
directed a fight of five Japanese bombers to my
lower right. I had almost committed my formation
to a jet formation at my left front, and I saw
another one. So we knew there were two formations
of aircraft. I chose this one. Which one's this
one? This one is to the lower right. So because I'm
in a better position, I had a little bit of altitude
on him. And I figured that I could just ease down in
position and just start on this left guy. and go
right through those four and just shoot all four of
them down just like that. Fully confident with
this, these terrible firepower of 650. Well, I
closed, started closing in and started firing,
and I probably fired too far away. I had to be, it
must have been at least a thousand yards, 50
calories, and I figured I'd start closing in. And I
knew they had rear gunners.
And I started closing in, and I got closer and
closer and closer. And I was close enough to see the
rear
gunner's bay down. It was a bay that hung down at the
bottom of the gun sticking out. And I knew they were
firing at me because I could see the smoke trailing
from the gun. And then all of a sudden, I caught it in
my vision. My yellow crystalline light warning
came on. And I looked down. And then I looked a
little closer, and smoke began to curl out from
behind my dashboard, from my instrument board.
And I said, oh, no, I've had it again. So I told Joe I
was going to pull it off. So I pulled down because I
knew I had trouble. I had an amazing dawn on me. I had
to have been hit with a return fire. My press cone
system had gone out. And about that time, I looked
up. And again, you know, see where I was, bummers
and all, and I saw these fighters, Japanese
fighters. It must have been about 10 or 12, little
I-97s. I saw them swarming down, coming down on us,
you know. So this was their plan. They had
suspected this, and they had to escort, fighter
escort, come in a little bit later, and much higher
than usual. I don't think Bob Neal at 20,000 feet
ever saw the fighters, because nobody got on them.
They came down immediately on me. And obviously,
you know, press tone light on. Obviously, I was
putting on steam out of my press tone system at the
rear of my airplane. So, you know, you always go
after the wounded guy. As I pulled off, two of these
fighters came down and began to close on me. Well, I
knew that, you know, eventually my engine was
going to freeze up. So I said, well, I nursed as long
as I can. So I was torn between the desire of pushing
full throttle and a steep dive to get away from them
I knew I could out-dive them, the little ones. They
had a thermal blaster on about 320 miles an hour.
And I could easily hit 450. But at the same time, I
knew that the more I sped up my engine, the less time
I was going to have it. And I made the prop throws.
It'd be like putting a big plywood of 4x8 right out
in front of me and slowing me down as I was beat for
them. So I was torn between, so I kept it, I got up to
about 375, just a little under 400, and sure enough
began to pull away from it, but not before they put
the bullet holes in my wing. And I saw the metal curl
up in the wings and the bullets went through them,
but I didn't catch on fire. And I, of course, I was
crouched behind that fire, the armor plate, and I,
you know, only about two months ago, I guess, was I
shot down. Sure. So... I admit I was a little bit
scared, and I was wondering if old Torrey Bond
hadn't had it.
But I kept looking, you know, I looked back at the
time, and finally they pulled away. And I thought,
well, at least they pulled off my danger. Then I
began to look, and I knew I was near our field. I
looked down the field way off to the right, but I
could see it. I was still probably about six or
eight thousand feet. And I saw a Japanese fighter
straight from the field. I said, oh, I can't go in
there. And I said, well, what do I do? What choice
did you have? I said, well, I'm going to crash land
this thing. I'm going to bail out. And about that
time, the prop just stopped. The whole engine just
froze, and the propeller stopped. Just, you know,
burn up. The metal just queued. And of course, it
meant it stopped. Well, then that's just like
putting air brakes on. I began to slow up, and then I
had to lower my nose. I was a glider from then on. And
I forgot about, you know, when engine not running,
I didn't have any hydraulic pressure. That
operated my flaps with my little finger on the
stick. Put my flaps down where I could, you know,
come in slow for landing, but I forgot about this. I
wouldn't have that capability to let my flaps
down. But my engine did, and I picked out a field I
was going to land in, rice paddy area, and left my
gear up, and I was all prepared to land. And As I was
coming in, getting ready to slow up, I hit my little
finger on the wheel to put the flap down, but no
flaps, and I just continued right on. And I saw I was
going to overshoot. How fast were you going? Oh, it
must have been 100, 105, something like that, 110.
And I just continued at that speed. I didn't slow
down any whatsoever. And you overshot your field?
Oh, I knew I was going to overshoot. I knew what
happened. I didn't have any flaps, so I couldn't
slow down. If I remember correctly, you had to be
around 100 at absolute max speed before you
stalled. Did you light your gas on? Uh-huh. Was
there any way to get rid of all your extra gas? Oh, I
didn't have time to do anything like that. As a
matter of fact, I didn't even think. All I thought
about was landing airplanes. For some reason or
other, I didn't want to bail out. I still don't know
why. I just I guess it was having done it before. But
thinking about it, all of a sudden I was too low to
bail out. And here I'd overshot that field. So at
the final moment, and at that very low speed, I took
a chance and made almost a vertical bank. I
couldn't have been over 50 feet from the ground.
And pulled in tightly to hit in a rice paddy area
immediately to my left. It's one I didn't install,
but it didn't. But just as I rolled out flat, I hit
the rice paddy area. And it so happened I hit, went
in a little bit steeper than I thought, and I
bounced. And thank God I bounced because I bounced
up to the next, I was going up terrace, rice paddy
areas. And I bounced up over about a three or four
foot hard dike mud little dam Just tangent with the
next layer, and came in on that, and then I caught
into the mud and slime, of course. I stopped in
about 50 feet. But had I gone on and landed where I
first hit, I'd have hit that mud dike, and oh, I'd
have killed myself. Just like we had another guy do
that one time before. Mangelberg would be landed
against one of them, and boy, it's like brick, like
stone. But as I hit the cockpit, I had the canopy
open. The canopy flew forward and kept all the mud
and stuff off of me, but my head flew forward in the
deceleration and caught my forehead on the gun
sight and tore a little of my scalp open there, just
scalp open, and didn't even, well, it stunned me a
little bit, didn't knock me out, and when I clicked
my senses, I immediately rolled the canopy open
and unstrapped and got the hell out of the
airplane. Here it might catch fire. and got out on
the wing because there was mud around them. And the
front end of the airplane, the propeller, the
gearbox, and part of the motor had torn off. It was
laying about 10 or 15 feet further up from the
airplane. And the metal was just blue. It was
burned up so that you could smell burnt metal and
all. At any rate, they got out. And they didn't look
around. Did you get away from the plane? I didn't
want to get away from the airplane first because,
you know, I'd step in mud up to my knees. And the
first thing I was- What about blowing up or
Japanese coming down? Well, I looked for straight
from Japanese, and then I remember they left me at
probably three or four thousand feet, so I may be
harmed. So I wasn't too worried about that. But I
looked around and saw all these Chinese peasants
in the field with pitchforks and all, you know.
digging at the rice, and I got to thinking about my
other experience. I thought, well, am I going to go
through the same thing again? These guys got
pitchforks in their hands. So I didn't know what to
do for a moment, but I just stood on a wingtip, and I,
like you say, I was a little concerned about maybe
the airplane would blow up, but then nothing
happened, and as the seconds went by, I I'd
forgotten about being alarmed about that. I just
put on a wingtip. Then I began to do my telephone
pattern mind with a couple of nearer guys, Chinese
peasants. And the general wanted to have walked
over, and I explained. And I believe I had, oh. Oh,
did you ask them? I showed them the Chinese emblem
on the wing of the airplane. So they knew I was no
enemy. I, you know, gave this deal, telephone,
telephone, you know, and they point over across to
the rice paddy area to a little building, same sort
of layout before, you know, a group of buildings,
and I, well, I've got to walk through this mud after
all, and I had another pair of boots on, so I decided
to at least save a parachute, so I took my parachute
out of the seat and my Form 1, and still had my helmet
on, so I started walking through the mud, walked
over this place, and came across another Chinese
guy on the phone,
and then he motioned for me to get the phone, and I
got on the phone, and lo and behold, I heard English
at the other end. No kidding. And it was a Catholic
father missionary. that I have to go through here
in the diary to get his name. But he told me who he
was, and then I explained to him what the situation
was. He told me, he said, well, one of the men there,
and I'll talk to him later on, he put him back, but
one of the men there will bring you to my house in Yen
Phu, Y-E-N-P-H-U, just south of Wayland, about 20
or 30 miles. That's where I knew where I was. But it
so turned out I had to walk about ten miles to get to
that place over a mountain ridge and across the
river carrying that parachute. But after I got off
I gave it back to Chinaman. He told Chinaman how to
do this and all that. And then most of them would
come. He didn't offer to carry a parachute or
anything. So we started walking and we walked over
a mountain ridge and stopped a little bit every now
and then and got to this river. And they had a boat
there that went across the river. maybe 300 feet
wide, and walked a little bit further and came to a
town, a little town, and walked me up to this
missionary's home. And he immediately looked at
my head, just bleeding a little, put his hands
around me, and then the next thing I know, he had the
mayor there, and I was a hero. Oh,
really? And this goes into another story. Now,
mind you, this was after being in combat and being
shot down a second time, and actually I was a little
shaken up. And then here all of a sudden, thrust
into this group of civilians that wanted to
welcome me with a function of being a hero, and give
me a wine and dine me, and I'm wanting to get back,
you know, to a base at Guilin, and I'm frustrated
and confused and all, and hurting a little. But
after maybe 30, 40 minutes, they did decide to take
me to the railroad station. I guess they were
waiting for a train that was on schedule. Put me on a
train, take me up to Quail Inn. All these were on the
railroad. But on the way up the train, they gave me
what's called a firecracker parade for a hero. And
I'm telling you, it was worse than combat. And I
tell you, you know, all the time I fly, the
weather's covered all. And they got oil on the
bottom all the time. Well, you know, the Chinese
invented firecrackers. And they're a great
mentality. And as I was going down the city, the
word got around. It was a small place, not near as
big as Austin. And I'd say about like Bonham,
something like that. But I'll bet there must have
been 100,000 people around. And the word got out,
and they lined up and down the main street on the way
to the railroad station. And two Chinese soldiers
would walk along in front of me, and they had these
groups of firecrackers in those trains, little
ones, fortunately. Lady hookers. You know,
clusters of them. They'd throw them in the middle
of the street, and they'd start busting, you know,
and they'd fly loose, and the others would bust,
you know. And I was this missionary, and a mayor was
walking down that way, and I said, Walt, some of
them, you know, would bust right under my leg and
fly up my leg, between a couple of legs. And I had
burnt places all over my legs the time I got to
train. You know, you get blessed. You were a
tippy-toe. But... You know, it was one of those
things where you couldn't do anything about it.
And when I got the train, they put me on. Well, what
did the people think in that little city? This is
probably the first time they've ever seen an
apartment. Well, the best I could understand, you
know, there's no doubt they were welcoming a hero
and a missionary explained, you know, that he'd
been here 20 years. He said, these people never
seen anything like this. He said, I assure you that
what y'all are doing here, you know, he gave me up.
And that they all know it, and they appreciate it,
and these people worship you, and you're God, and
all. And we had been given a supplement that we were
given. We stayed there about, well, I stayed there
until I came home in August. They gave us parties
and all. So you stayed there. Yeah. Okay, so you got
back on the train. Yeah, and then that train took me
on up to Quail Inn and stopped at Quail Inn. When I
got off there, Bob Neal met me and took me out to pee.
Only old man was there. Uh-huh. Question also.
Yeah. When I got off, I had the bandage on my head,
and he looked at me and said, Charlie? He said,
what's happened to your luck? Or something.
What's happened to your luck? You haven't been
very lucky lately. He said, it's the second time
they got you. And I said, yeah. And he said, well, I
ate pee all night. I told him I was sorry I lost the
airplane. I told him what happened. He said, don't
worry about it. I said, we're glad you're back. You
know, words like that. Of course, he was in the
middle of playing another campaign, and that's
the reason he was there. So, after a few more
minutes, he took me to the hospital, and then we
just was critiquing the fight. Well, of course,
they'd already critiqued it, but Bob Neal began to
critique me on it. And what happened in the fight?
The Japanese, like I say, earlier, had told you,
you know, they... knew we were coming, that would
be there, and they expected me. They had their
surprise. Well, it so happened the flight I
attacked was the bombers, and it was the bait. The
bait for all of us. And I attacked it, and then the
fighters came down on us. But the other flight was
in the formation of the bomber flight. I think it
was six of those. I didn't prepare it with that. Or
five or six. But these weren't bombers. They were
in a bomber formation. And when Bob Neal... No, a
George Burgard flight attacked them, and Bob Neal
eventually joined in with them. They pulled up
into Immelman's twin-engine aircraft and turned
back and, you know, were practically on the tail of
the P-40 when you knew what was going on. It so
happened this was the brand-new, I think it was
called an I-97, twin-engine fighter that the
Japanese built. It was the first time we ever saw
it. These were fighters, and they had
20-millimeter guns in them. Were they fast? Oh,
yeah. Well, they were comparable to a P-40.
Actually, not as maneuverable as a P-40 because
they're bigger and twin-engine. And actually,
they had a rear gunner on it. It wasn't a real
fighter per se. Sort of a combo. Yeah. More of an
attack airplane. At any rate, very maneuverable.
But not as maneuverable as a Zero. And after George
Burgoyne and his flight, the boys would gain the
sense that they knew then that they were up against
fighters. I think they shot one of them down, and
later on we, well, as a matter of fact, the Chinese
recovered the crew where the thing belly landed
and captured the gunner, and we brought the gunner
back to our air base where we actually had a chance
to talk with him to an interpreter. He was scared to
death. He was scared? He was scared to death. And he
wanted to know where the bar power for the Tiger
came from, so we showed him the gun. Oh, really? He
showed the Japanese prisoner the guns? Yeah. What
did he think of that? Oh, well, he was impressed. To
the interpreter, that was the only question he
asked. Where is all your firepower from the Flying
Tiger airplane? We showed it to him. And then we
wanted to take him up to the cave. We had our
operations officer in a cave in one of these big
mountains.
The interpreter told the Chinese army guys to
bring him up to a cave in North Ferry. He looked up at
the cave. He thought he had it then. He didn't want
to go. He was scared to death. They thought, sure,
he was going to take him up there and kill him. But
finally, he went. Of course, he had to go. And we
took him up there, and the Italian people grilled
him then. But this is one way we learned about their
plan, from him telling
us. And what did they do with this Japanese
prisoner? I don't know. They took him off later on.
I'm sure they gave him to war. I'm sure they did. The
Chinese had no mercy with Japanese prisoners. And
then I had that to recuperate. And then I was back
flying, though, in another few days. That was just
a hickey on my head. Sure. I think I was off about
four or five days. And then, sure enough, we began
to get in a lot of aerial dogfights from the Handcow
area. And the United States Air Force, about that
time, Army Air Corps, brought in a squadron of
B-25s, bombers. First time we ever had any
bombers. We went and escorted them. And then we
started that phase of operations, trying to
escort the B-25s. A brand new outfit that had no
combat experience at all. And that was quite an
experience. It was quite disheartening at first.
They were green guys, and they couldn't even find
their targets. But it basically turned out to be a
very capable outfit. Now, these were part of the
Army Air Corps. That's right, the Americans.
Okay, so these were the Americans in there, and
they were just working with the Flying Tigers. We
were an escort. And who was the general in charge?
Well, they were C under Chenault. At that time,
Chenault had already been inducted back into the
Air Force. And for all practical purposes, the
14th Air Force was organized on paper anyhow. And
this outfit was signed to him. He was a brigadier
general in the Army Air Corps at that time. Okay,
and so the Flying Tiger pilots, though, they were
still civilian. Oh, yeah. And the bomber pilots
were Army Air Corps. That's right. And we knew at
that time, by that time, that some, probably July
the 4th. Summer of 42 then. Summer of 42. And we knew
by then that around July the 4th of thereabouts, we
figured in a minute's time that we would be
disbanded.
And it was during that time at Quail Inn where all of
us were interviewed by a team from the United
States Army Air Corps with the idea of, trying to
get us to stay and inducting us as lieutenants and
so forth. Oh, okay. So then sometime after Chong
King, then you were interviewed to be given...
Well, at Guilin I was interviewed, yes. To be
given. And tell me about that. Was the idea here to
interview you, try to get you to stay there, and
give you an act of commission? What General
Arnold's... half-Arnold's objective was. Was he
there? No, no. Oh, General Arnold had paid visits
to China. I never did see him. Okay. But it was
always good. On his subordinates. Oh, yeah. Oh,
yeah. As a matter of fact, old Tex Randall, a
brigadier general, I don't know where he is today,
he was the general in charge of about four or five
men. Interviewing each one of us, particularly
the pilots, talked to the airmen in mass, but
interviewing each one of the pilots individually
for the idea of contrapposition the idea of trying
to talk us into staying over and he took the wrong
attitude rather you know forgetting he wasn't
talking to military men he was talking to people
that had he had no authority over at all and he
irritated every one of us and pretty soon for
example tell me tell me about your interview with
uh well uh i had met him before see i knew him and he
knew me and of course uh when I was called in, in the
cave, by the way, in Operation, sitting in our very
pleasant place. He said, well, Troy, I ain't no
doubt about you. We know you. He said, ain't no
doubt. You're going to go back to your old air-con
steer, aren't you? And I said, well, I don't know. I
said, you know, something like this. What do I get?
I said, you know, Tex, all I want is a regular
commission. He said, you give me a regular
commission and I'll stay here right now. Well, I
just can't do that, Troy. And I said, well, I...
know, I've been over here a while. I'd go back home
and fly with maybe TWA." He said, well, and this is
what irritated me and sort of insulted me. You
know, all the stuff I'd been through with combat.
He said, well, you know, they put you on a ship and
send you back, so there ain't no doubt probably one
of those submarines sank you and you get lost at
sea. And I thought, that's really irritating.
Sure. He was trying to scare me, you know. Well, in
fact, I said that I think I said, that almost does
it. I said, I'm not worried about that. And he
definitely... Irritated at all? Most of them,
yeah. And a lot of the boys, had he talked me into
staying, I had enough influence and prestige in
the outfit by then that I'm sure a lot of the guys who
stayed with me, I could have talked them into doing
it. But once I got fed up with it, he practically
lost the whole outfit. Oh, what would they have
done? Four or five stayed open. What would they
have done for you? Well, the ones that stayed, I
think Tex Hill, he was corner commander, I think he
was given a majority. And I think he would have
given me a majority. A majority, what does that
mean? Major. Oh, okay, so they would have made you a
major with a reserve commission. Right, right.
Probably has to go out first or second, just like it
did actually when I did go back there. Then the
captain, then I'm first, then captain, then
major. I think four or five pilots stayed over. Tex
Hill was one of them. But by far, the majority of us
went home. By far, almost 98% of the airmen went
home. We were all tired. And again, that just shows
you the importance of an individual sent on a
mission to do a job. He completely watched it. He
didn't take the right approach to it. I don't think
he understood who he was talking to. He just forgot
who he was talking to. You know, all of us were
ex-military people, and I think he figured, well,
in other words, he just took the attitude, we've
had it, and we're going to be in the military
whether you like it or not. Well, we do. We were told
by Chenault, all of you do what you want to do.
You've been faithful to me. I'm not putting
pressure on you to do anything. You want to stay?
Fine. I need you. I can use you. You know that. But if
you want to go home, I won't hold it against you. He
looked me in the face and didn't tell me anything.
So I didn't have any pressure from him. He was fair
and square with me. And I remember telling him
goodbye at Chongqing. He hated seeing me go. They
had tears in their eyes. I went. I saw the men tell
him goodbye and cry like babies.
But that was subsequent. We still had, you know,
all during the interviews, we still had fighting
to do. And during it, that last few weeks, Johnny
Allison, who later became a major general in the
Air Force, brought in the 23rd Pursuit Group of the
United States Army Air Corps, and I flew with him
and a squadron of regular Air Force guys during the
last week or two I was there. I really was proud of
it. Gee, I was tickled to death to see him. and
gung-ho boys know where to go they were green and
they knew it but uh johnny allison his final
fighter party as he was just as uh well he acted as
though you know i was the authority and boss and
probably that boy had a thousand more hours in
fighter airplane landia but uh when we sat at night
and talked for hours you know passing on tactics
and all and they uh They took over smoothly and did
all
right. The rest of the time was, comparatively
speaking, uneventful in the latter part of June,
July. Oh, 4th of July, well, latter part of June, I
got another hassle. I had to scramble some
airplanes at Heng Yang just up the river and up the
railroad north Quay-Lynn, a Han-Cow raid of
Zeros. We met Zeros during those days. They had
brought the Japanese Navy pilots with Zeros, far
superior to the Japanese Army. They were
determined to wipe us out and announced on the
radio every evening that they were determined
that they were going to eliminate the ABG. And they
started hitting us from the south at Cancun, White
Cloud Airport, and also from the north at Han-Cow.
And it was dip and tuck for a while, but we managed to
shoot the Zeros down just as well as the others. Did
you have any victories against the Zeros? No, I
never shot a Zero down. The last combat, the last
Japanese I saw, this was about, I guess, a week or
ten days before I left China to come home. I had to,
we were up at Heng Yang, and I had a raid coming from
Pan Cal, and I wasn't on alert. I wasn't a skater,
but I was out there. And the guys took off, and there
was that old recce airplane sitting out there,
P-40, but it was in good shape. The only thing, it
didn't have guns in it. It had a camper in it. So I
thought, well, I'm not going to leave that
airplane. It's great. So I went out on my own, got in
that airplane, and took off. And, you know, time
was about 20,000 feet. It had guns on it, so we could
do a little bit better and hit it out. So I went
20,000 feet. And I just flying around, you know,
trying to stay out of the way, because I didn't have
any guns. Looked across, saw an airplane coming
toward me, and I didn't know what it was, first of
all. And as we got abreast of each other, it was
obviously zero. That's the first zero I'd seen
come. And it was up there with you? Yeah, and here I
was in an unarmed airplane, and obviously he was up
there shooting. So we both started turning, you
know, me doing recognize each other, you know,
come around. And I knew in no time, oh, he'd be on my
tail, so I just did a split ass. And started
straight down with full throttle, but I knew I
could dive away from him. And I, around 10, 12,000
feet, I hit a clouded area, so I came to the clouds. I
knew it was all right then. I knew he wasn't far. And
I'd been up there quite a while, and all of a sudden,
a red light turned on. fuel light turned on in the
airplane, indicating, you know, fuel, no fuel. I
had forgotten for the moment, because I wasn't
even shaken up or caught without ammo, without
guns or anything. And I figured, well, third time,
let's charm. So I had forgotten about the red
warning light on the fuel system. It still gives
you about 20 minutes. I figured I was low on fuel,
and I figured they didn't die any second. So I aimed
at Ling Ling Field. I still had enough altitude to
get to Ling Ling Field, just south of Hanyang, even
by gliding in. But I played my approach and all, and
by the time I touched down, I still had power. And
then when I got to the field, I talked to a mechanic,
and it dawned on me that I still had probably 12
minutes of fuel in the airplane. At least got the
airplane down. They didn't strike it. So that was,
I guess, the last
I guess it was the last combat mission I was really
on. Oh, I was on some scramble missions later on
during the day that I didn't engage. I didn't see
any Japanese. And so when was that one? This was
July the 3rd. July the 3rd. You know,
and... Oh, wait, there's the old man singing too.
175 hours and 40 minutes I flew in combat. Total
time, 175. 14th of July. 14th of July, what? I left,
actually,
the 14th of July, I took off from China on the way
home. Went back to Chongqing and India. And how'd
you go home? Well, that's another story. Were you
sorry about leaving China, or what were your
feelings? No, I was tired, combat-weary.
I was very, I was, I guess I was hurt by Tech Sanders'
attitude. And I couldn't get out of my mind,
General Burr had come, and only Congress can do
that. And I thought, I had made up my mind that I was
going to go home and see, personally, And I did. I
was going to ask General Hap Arnold for a regular
commission. I wasn't going to give up. And that
was, I made up my mind to do that. And after Tech
Sanders treated me the way he did, and the old man, I
told the old man what I was going to do, and he said he
didn't blame me. And well, the story to get home,
OK. We were leaving, told the old man goodbye. It
was a very emotional deal. His chief of staff, Skip
Adair, asked to pull Bob Neal and I off the side. We
were practically the guys that ran the Flying
Tigers in under Chenault. Bob Neal was really the
commander, if you will, and I was the operations
officer. In other words, the old man's right-hand
man. By that time, I was a squadron commander,
getting a squadron commander for $750. And I was
one of, I think, 16 pilots that volunteered to stay
over an extra 10 days after July the 4th, because at
the old man's request, his plea, that we were right
in the middle of this Hancock campaign and he
needed us. And the 23rd Pursuit Group with Johnny
Allison hadn't come in on schedule. So I stayed
another, that's the reason I didn't leave until
the 14th. 14th of July. 14th of July, 1942. Skip
Adair pulled Bob Nail and I offside and said, would
you two guys mind, see if you can't take care of Red
Petac? She was one of the two nurses we had.
Terrific gal. She married, what was his first
name? Petac, P-E-T-A-C-H. A real fine guy. He was
one of the other squadrons. They fell in love with
each other over there, and they married towards,
I'd say, well,
maybe the early summer.